reticent, taciturn, terse, laconic and brusque 

Terse and laconic pretty much mean the same thing: to-the-point, using words sparingly, or only saying what needs to be said. 
Brusque is sort of the same, except it has a negative connotation. 
Describe a quiet, thoughtful old man as laconic or a direct paragraph as terse, 
Describe someone who dismissed your complaint with a two-word brush-off as brusque. 

I think of reticent and taciturn as pretty similar too. 
These words refer to someone who is quiet and reserved and doesn't say much.


Loquacious, garrulous, palaver, voluble, and prolix

Garrulous and loquacious and voluble and prolix all basically mean chatty.
Palaverous is slightly different; 
not only does it mean that you are chatty, but it also means you are chatty about nothing. 
Think of a two-year-old child and you basically know what being palaverous is all about.


Criticizing or blaming words. 
Would you believe that aspersion, belittle, berate, calumny, castigate, decry, defamation, denounce, deride, derisive, diatribe, disparage, excoriate, gainsay, harangue, impugn, inveigh, lambaste, objurgate, obloquy, opprobrium, rebuke, remonstrate, reprove, revile, tirade, and vituperate all fall into this category? 
They certainly aren't exactly the same, but there's a lot to be said for knowing a general level of meaning and similarity.

Lying words.
Words such as apocryphal, belie, canard, chicanery, defamation (again!), dissemble, duplicity, equivocate, erroneous, ersatz, fallacious, feign, guile, mendacious, mendacity, perfidy, prevaricate, specious, and spurious have something to do with being false or deceptive.

Change-related words. 
capricious, changeable, faddish, fanciful, fickle, flighty, inconstant, mercurial, temperamental, tempestuous, quirky, unpredictable, variable, vicissitude, volatile, whimsical, 

Starting-something words. 
One category of words has to do with sparking or starting something. 
Whether you arouse, beget, cause, engender, enkindle, foment, incite, induce, instigate, kindle, rouse, prompt, spark, or trigger, you are starting something up!

Uncaring words. 
Whether or not you care about something has a lot of words. 
Apathy, dispassion, ennui, impassivity, indifference, languor and lethargy all have something to do with a lack of caring or interest.

Weakening words. 
We have lots of words for reducing or weakening. 
Allay, alleviate, assuage, attenuate, diminish, ease, enervate, and palliate are among the many words that have something to do with lessening. 

Basically, all of those words mean 'to make something less bad'. Most of them are quite unusual, and I'd say the most useful are 'abate' and 'alleviate'. 

'Abate' is intransitive, which means it doesn't take an object. It means 'become less severe', i.e. "The storm abated". You can't 'abate' something. 

The others are transitive, so they are actions that someone can do - they take an object. 

'Mitigate' is to reduce the harmful effects of a situation, e.g. "Mitigate the effects of the company's bankruptcy". 
'Alleviate' is to make a problem less severe, e.g. "The medicine alleviated the pain from his broken arm". 
'Assuage' is to make a bad feeling less intense, e.g. "The phone call from her mother assuaged her fears about her mother's safety". 
'Palliate' is used very rarely. I've never used it myself, actually. It basically means to make the symptoms of something less bad without fixing the problem (cause). 
'Attenuate' means to reduce the force or strength of something. Basically, you can just use 'reduce' instead and more people will understand you. 
'Ameliorate' is to make something that is bad, better. It basically means 'improve' or 'fix', but in a more fancy way. More people will understand you if you use those other words.


You can make a nice list for words that strengthen too.

PREVARICATE -Be ambiguous or unclear in order to mislead or withhold information and doing it deliberately and the meaning of other word 
EQUIVOCATE - (equal + vocal): saying yes and no with equal voice .so they are synonyms of each other.



(1) Mantle. A mantle is a loose, sleeveless cloak or covering, generally worn by a woman. It’s something that covers the whole body like a blanket. Because of that, it’s second meaning is that a mantle is some broad or important role that is passed down from one person to another. “Mantle” is also a verb, which means to cover completely or envelop.

I generally picture an important cloth robe, such as the robe of a shaman or town elder, which covers the person entirely and will be passed down from family member to family member. That image bundles together all the definitions of “mantle” for me and helps me keep them clear in my mind.

(2) Poncho. A poncho is a blanket-like shawl worn over the shoulders, sometimes made of plastic in order to keep away rain. Its key quality is that it covers something up, which is the quality that’s likely to be referenced in a metaphor.

(3) Raiment. “Raiment” is just another word for “clothing”. It is most likely to be used literally, but could also be used to describe the covering or costume on something in a metaphorical way. This is a good word to memorize because it is a tough one to “figure out” during the test – not a lot of roots or other similar words to tie it to.

(4) Unravel. To unravel something means to unwind it so that it comes apart, like you would do with a spool of thread or a piece of cloth. While “unravel” is often used literally, it’s perhaps more often used more metaphorically to mean “come undone” in the sense of a plan or someone’s mental health “coming apart at the seams”, to use another clothing-derived expression.

Annoyingly, the word “ravel” means “to unravel something”. Yikes. It also means to tangle, knot, or complicate it. As a noun, a “ravel” is a tangle or cluster.

(5) Sartorial. “Sartorial” is an adjective meaning having to do with tailoring, clothes, style or fashion. If someone has a sartorial flair, for example, he or she has a flair for style and clothing. I am a big fan of the website The Sartorialist, where a respected fashion photographer photographers people with unique style and tailoring the world over. Checking it out might help you remember what this word means!

(6) Millinery. Specifically, “millinery” means “women’s hats”, or the business of making or selling women’s hats. Talk about something we don’t need a word for. Not the world’s most common GRE word, but if it shows up, it’s fairly hard to guess or figure out that specific meaning if you don’t already know it.

(7) Pleat. A pleat is a fold stitched into cloth, such as you would have in a pleated skirt. The word “pleat” can be used metaphorically to mean fold or crease in something other than cloth. For example, mountain ridges could pleat the landscape.

(8) Plait. A plait is a braid. While you commonly see braids on cloth made of ribbon, cord, or string, you can braid everything from hair to bread dough. When you realize that to braid means to wind, weave, or tie together, you can see how this word is often used metaphorically: you can plait together ideas, concepts, or words, among other things.

(9) Sheathe. A sheath is the protective cover that holds a weapon such as a knife or sword, and to sheathe something is to put it in such a protective covering. The verb “sheathe” is often used metaphorically to mean put something “sharp” or dangerous in a covering so that it can’t do any damage or have any effect. For example, you might want to sheathe your razor-sharp wit when you are in court, or sheathe your sharp tongue when talking to your child’s vice principal.

(10) Ragamuffin. Growing up, I spent lots of time with my grandmother, who is turning 90 in two weeks, so I definitely know the definition of “ragamuffin”, because I was called one all the time. A ragamuffin is someone, usually a child, dressed in ragged or messy clothes. Someone who’s unkempt (which is another GRE word). A guttersnipe, if you want another weird word.


1. Principle vs Principal

You would have become aware of this confusion when in school.
My principal, the head of the school I studied in, once told me “remember, a principal is your PAL” (yeah right!). Although grossly untrue- that statement served as a great mnemonic.

A principal is the head or the most important part of something.
A principle is a belief or rule that one lives by or is expected to live by.

2. Appraise vs Apprise

The word appraise means to be evaluated; for instance the appraisals at work. Remember that one always wishes to be praised after one is appraised! (lame, but works!).
Apprise on the other hand means to inform someone of something.

Eg: My manager apprised me of the appraisals that were scheduled to happen in a month.

3. Collide vs Collude

I’ve actually head a person say “My car colluded with another car yesterday”.
Hopefully what he meant to say was that his car collided with another car!
Collide means to crash into. Collude means to conspire!
Perhaps the only time cars conspired was in the movie Cars 2; remember all those old rickety cars that conspired to take over the world? Those cars were colluding!

4. Uninterested vs Disinterested

Often assumed (wrongly) to be interchangeable, many people misuse the word “disinterested”. While “uninterested”, which means that one lacks interest in something, generally has a negative connotation, “disinterested” has a positive connotation. Disinterested means to not be biased : to be impartial!
Calling a judge “disinterested” will be perceived as a compliment!

5. Compliment vs Complement

Quick tip: complement looks like complete, and that’s what it means!
When something adds on to and completes something else it complements it.
Eg: A very smooth operating system complements the carefully selected hardware on the new iPhone 5s!

The word “compliment” of course means to praise someone or something.

6. Torturous vs Tortuous

Remember that the word Torture is similar to the word Torturous.

Eg: Visits to the dentist always end up being torturous: I’m always in more pain after meeting him than before! :(

Tortuous, on the other hand, has its roots from the word “torque” which sort of means to twist. Tortuous means to have a lot of twists and turns – to not be straightforward.
A movie could be hard to follow because its plot is very tortuous.


Tone/Attitude Words
 
1.        accusatory-charging of wrong doing
2.        apathetic-indifferent due to lack of energy or concern
3.        awe-solemn wonder
4.        bitter-exhibiting strong animosity as a result of pain or grief
5.        cynical-questions the basic sincerity and goodness of people
6.        condescension; condescending-a feeling of superiority
7.        callous-unfeeling, insensitive to feelings of others
8.        contemplative-studying, thinking, reflecting on an issue
9.        critical-finding fault
10.     choleric-hot-tempered, easily angered
11.     contemptuous-showing or feeling that something is worthless or lacks respect
12.     caustic-intense use of sarcasm; stinging, biting
13.     conventional-lacking spontaneity, originality, and individuality
14.     disdainful-scornful
15.     didactic-author attempts to educate or instruct the reader
16.     derisive-ridiculing, mocking
17.     earnest-intense, a sincere state of mind
18.     erudite-learned, polished, scholarly
19.     fanciful-using the imagination
20.     forthright-directly frank without hesitation
21.     gloomy-darkness, sadness, rejection
22.     haughty-proud and vain to the point of arrogance
23.     indignant-marked by anger aroused by injustice
24.     intimate-very familiar
25.     judgmental-authoritative and often having critical opinions
26.     jovial-happy
27.     lyrical-expressing a poet’s inner feelings; emotional; full of images; song-like
28.     matter-of-fact--accepting of conditions; not fanciful or emotional
29.     mocking-treating with contempt or ridicule
30.     morose-gloomy, sullen, surly, despondent
31.     malicious-purposely hurtful
32.     objective-an unbiased view-able to leave personal judgments aside
33.     optimistic-hopeful, cheerful
34.     obsequious-polite and obedient in order to gain something
35.     patronizing-air of condescension
36.     pessimistic-seeing the worst side of things; no hope
37.     quizzical-odd, eccentric, amusing
38.     ribald-offensive in speech or gesture
39.     reverent-treating a subject with honor and respect
40.     ridiculing-slightly contemptuous banter; making fun of
41.     reflective-illustrating innermost thoughts and emotions
42.     sarcastic-sneering, caustic
43.     sardonic-scornfully and bitterly sarcastic
44.     satiric-ridiculing to show weakness in order to make a point, teach
45.     sincere-without deceit or pretense; genuine
46.     solemn-deeply earnest, tending toward sad reflection
47.     sanguineous -optimistic, cheerful
48.     whimsical-odd, strange, fantastic; fun
 
Back to AP Main


Pertinent means relevant, to the point, appropriate or meaningful to the subject at hand. The assignment was to write a paragraph that included all the pertinent information about our proposed projects, including the topic, a time-table, and a budget. Remember: The pertinent information about you relates to your character, not your measurements!

To be orthodox is to be conventional, to follow established ways, to be traditional.

Anguish is extreme pain, either physical or emotional.

Subordinate means less than, secondary to, not as important as.

To exhort is to strongly urge, to seriously warn, to seriously advise.

To be culpable means to be guilty, to be to blame for something, to have it be your fault.

Nihilism includes the belief that morality is relative and there is no such thing as right and wrong.

A synthesis is a blending, a combining of parts into a whole, an integration of two or more elements.

To be abstinent means to refrain from indulging, to abstain.

Squalor refers to filth, wretchedness, repulsive conditions.

To delude means to deceive, to mislead, to cause to hold a false belief.

A maverick is a nonconformist, a rebel, a freethinker, a groundbreaker.

Copious means plentiful, abundant.

To be inept is to be clumsy, unskilled, ineffective.

Myopia refers to short-sightedness.

To infer is to deduce, to to find out by reasoning.

Ostentatious means showy, overblown, pretentious.

Cursory means superficial, hasty, brief and haphazard.

An epigram is a witty statement, short, polished, pithy saying, usually in verse, and often having a satiric or paradoxical twist at the end.

The word ascetic refers to the relinquishment of normal comforts, to self-denial, and renunciation of worldly pleasures.

A cynic mistrusts people's motives, thinks everything is motivated by selfishness, is suspicious of appearances, and tends to see the potential problems, rather than the potential joys in a situation.

A genre is a category, a type.

Chicanery means trickery, deceitfulness, underhanded sneakiness, deception by clever means.

To disseminate is to scatter, to spread around, to distribute.

Venal means corrupt, open to bribery.

To be congenial is to be friendly, pleasant, agreeable.

Banal means ordinary, unoriginal, lacking freshness, trite.

Your countenance refers to your face, especially as regards its expression.

To distend means to swell, to bloat, to extend outward, to expand.

A magnate is someone who is influential, who is rich, powerful and controls something.

Substantive means solid, real, having substance, substantial, meaty There is no substantive evidence to justify his arrest.

To libel is to defame, to write or publish things about another that are both damaging and of questionable truth.

Bovine means ox-like or cowlike or related to cows in the same way that canine means dog-like or related to dogs and feline means cat-like or related to cats.

Disdain is contempt or scorn.

Expedient means practical or efficient, advantageous.

An axiom is a statement that is widely accepted as true.

The word nuance refers to subtleties, slight shades of variation, fine points, shadings.

Pedestrian means unimaginative, commonplace, dull.

Largess is generosity or philanthropy.

To squander is to waste.

Theology is the study of religion, the study of the relationship between God and what exists as creation.

A chronicle is a history, a record of events in order of time.

To covet something is to desire it intensely, to yearn for it.

An epitome is a perfect example that embodies the very essence of something.

Veracity refers to the quality of truthfulness.

To be contentious is to be argumentative, quarrelsome.

Staunch means firmly committed, dedicated, steadfast.

To admonish is to scold, to warn, to caution, to remind of a duty.

Munificent means lavishly generous.

To be stoic is to be unemotional, to appear indifferent to pleasure or pain, to maintain a "stiff upper lip.
